---
layout: default
title: "08. central limit theorem"
tags: tag1
use_math: true
---


# Central Limit Theorem
---
Both of the LLNs state that $\bar{X} = n^{-1}\Sigma_{k=1}^{n}X_k$ consists of i.i.d. realisations $X_1, X_2, \dots, X_n$ with $\operatorname{E}X_k = \mu$ and $\operatorname{Var}X_k = \sigma^2 < \infty$ converges in prob. and a.s. to $\mu$, respectively. Whereas, the CLTs state that a scaled difference $n^{-1}\Sigma_{k=1}^{n}X_k - \mu$ converges in dist. to the standard normal. The Galton's [quincunx](https://www.statisticshowto.com/galton-board/) has ingeniously illustrated the fundamental idea behind the CLT.


## I
---
Suppose $X \sim \operatorname{Bin}(n,p)$ is a binomially distributed random variable with $\operatorname{E}X = np$ and $\operatorname{Var}X = npq$, where $p>0$ and $p+q=1$. The [de Moivre–Laplace theorem]() shows $\binom{n}{h}p^{h}q^{n-h} \simeq \exp(-(h-np)^{2}/2npq)/\sqrt{2\pi{npq}}$ as $n \to \infty$, hence the binomial can be well approximated by the normal. Moreover, $Z_n = (X-np)/\sqrt{npq} \xrightarrow{d} Z$, and so $P(Z_n \leq z) \xrightarrow{p} \Phi(z)$ as $n\to\infty$, where $Z \sim \mathcal{N}(0,1)$ is continuous, $\Phi(z) = \int_{-\infty}^{z} f_Z(v)\,\mathrm{d}v$ and $f_Z(z) = \exp(-z^2/2)/\sqrt{2\pi}$ are the distribution and the density function of $Z$, respectively. de Moivre initially applied a normal to approximate the number of heads from the fair coin tosses **(#1)** and then Laplace extended the work.

By definition, for any $Y \sim \mathcal{N}(\mu,\sigma^2)$, the first derivative of $f\_{Y}(y)$ is given by $f\_{Y}^{\prime}(y) = -\sigma^{-2}(y-\mu) \cdot f\_{Y}(y)$ such that $\int\_{-\infty}^{\infty} f\_{Y} = 1$, and so $[f^{\prime}_Y(y) / f\_{Y}(y)] \cdot [\sigma^{2} / (\mu-y)] = 1$. That is, one can use the [discrete derivative](https://calculus.subwiki.org/wiki/discrete%20derivative) with $h = np + c\sqrt{npq}$ and any arbitrary number $c>0$ to show that $[(p\_{X}(n,k+1)-p\_{X}(n,k))/p\_{X}(n,k)] \cdot [npq / np-h] \to 1$ as $n\to\infty$, thus prove the theorem **(#2)**. Although machines now do calculations (i.e. it still eases pain of handwork for a binomial dist.), the theorem survives because it has nothing to do with the shape of dist. of $X$ (i.e. a population dist.). In particular, a sequence/collection of i.i.d. [Bernoulli trials]() with probability $p$ of success need not be identical.

Suppose $(X\_n)\_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ is a sequence of ind. random variables with $\operatorname{E}X_n = \mu_n$ and $\operatorname{Var}X_n = \sigma_{n}^2 < \infty$, thereby we define $S_n = \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}X_k$ and $\operatorname{Var}S_n = s_n^2 = \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}\sigma^{2}_k$. If $(X\_n)\_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ holds [Lyapunov's condition](): $\lim\_{n\to\infty} s^{-(2+\delta)}_n \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}\operatorname{E}{\vert X_k - \mu_k \vert}^{2+\delta} = 0$ for some $\delta > 0$, then the [Lyapunov's CLT]() guarantees $Z_n = s^{-1}_n \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n} (X_k-\mu_k) = (S_n-\operatorname{E}S_n)/\sqrt{\operatorname{Var}S_n} \xrightarrow{d} Z$ as $n\to\infty$. Lyapunov showed that the average behaviour is all that matters and a few exceptionally large individual $(2+\delta)$-moments are acceptable **(#3)**. That is, Lyapunov's condition restricts a contribution of each $\sigma^{2}_k$ onto $s^2_n$ to be negligible (when $n$ is large), thus realisation of $X_k$ cannot distort a convergence.


## II
---
Lindeberg proved that the above CLT remains true as long as $\sigma^{2}_k$ are not-too-large in comparison to $s^2_n$. In this regard, the [Lindeberg-Feller's CLT]() states that, if the sequence holds [Lindeberg's condition](): $\lim\_{n\to\infty} s_n^{-2} \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}\operatorname{E}[(X_k - \mu_k)^{2} I\_{\vert X_k - \mu_k \vert > \varepsilon{s_n}}] = 0$ for every $\varepsilon>0$, then $Z_n = s_n^{-1}\Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}(X_k - \mu_k) \xrightarrow{d} \mathcal{N}(0,1)$ as $n \to \infty$. Whilst the statement merely provides the sufficiency ($\Rightarrow$: if), [Feller's condition]() adds the partial necessity ($\Leftarrow$: only if) by proving (i) Lindeberg's condition implies $\lim\_{n\to\infty} \max_k \sigma_k^2/s_n^{2} = 0$; (ii) a sequence of ind. random variables that converges in dist. to the standard normal and also satisfies $\lim\_{n\to\infty} \max_k \sigma_k^2/s_n^{2} = 0$ implies Lindeberg's condition.

We can assume that $\mu\_{k}=0$ wlog and define $\varphi\_{Z\_n}(t) = \operatorname{E}e^{itZ}$ for $Z\_{n} = S\_{n}/s\_{n}$ to examine the convergence. If $X^{\prime}\_{k} = X\_{k} - \mu\_{k}$ and $S^{\prime}\_{n} = \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}X^{\prime}\_{k}$, then $Z^{\prime}\_{n} = S^{\prime}\_{n} / s^{\prime}\_{n} = S\_{n} / s\_{n} = Z\_{n}$, where $s^{\prime}\_{n} = s\_{n}$. Moreover, because $\operatorname{E}[(X\_{k})^{2} I\_{\vert X\_{k} \vert > \varepsilon{s\_{n}}}] = \operatorname{E}[(X^{\prime}\_{k})^{2} I\_{\vert X^{\prime}\_{k} \vert > \varepsilon{s^{\prime}\_{n}}}]$, if the condition holds, then $Z^{\prime}\_{n} \xrightarrow{d} Z$ as $n\to\infty$ and so $Z\_{n} \xrightarrow{d} Z$. We therefore focus on proving that $\varphi\_{Z\_{n}}(t) = \prod\_{k=1}^{n}\varphi\_{X\_{k}}(t/s\_{n}) = \exp(\Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}\log(\varphi\_{X\_{k}}(t/s\_{n}))) \to \exp(-t^2/2) = \varphi\_{Z}(t)$ as $n\to\infty$ **(#4)**. It may be worth expanding $(S\_{n})\_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ as a row-wise ind. [triangular arrays]() $S\_{n} = X\_{n,1} + X\_{n,2} + \dots + X\_{n,n}$ to manifest generality and capability of the theorems.

For the other half, we bound $C\_{1}(n) = \max_k s\_{n}^{-2}\operatorname{E}(X^{2}\_{k} I\_{\vert X\_{k} \vert \leq\varepsilon{s\_{n}}}) + \max_k s\_{n}^{-2} \operatorname{E}(X^{2}\_k I\_{\vert X\_k \vert >\varepsilon{s\_n}}) \leq \varepsilon^2 + C\_{2}(n)$ for any $\varepsilon > 0$, where $C\_{1}(n) = \max_{k}s\_{n}^{-2}\sigma\_{k}^2$ and $C\_{2}(n) = s\_{n}^{-2}\operatorname{E}(X^{2}\_{k} I\_{\vert X\_{k} \vert >\varepsilon{s\_{n}}})$. Subsequently, Lindeberg's condition implies $C\_{2}(n) \to 0$ as $n\to\infty$ and hence $C\_{1}(n) \to 0$. In particular, $\mu\_{k} = 0$ guarantees the existence of $k < n$ such that $0 < \sigma^2\_{k}$ and the term $s^{-2}\_{n} \sigma^2\_{k} \to 0$ whenever $C\_{1}(n) \to 0$. Whilst a numerator in Lindeberg's condition seeks for every $X\_{k}$ with $\operatorname{Var}(X\_{k} I\_{\vert X\_{k} \vert > \varepsilon{s\_{n}}})$, the one in Feller's condition seeks for a single $X\_{k}$ with $\max\_{k} \operatorname{Var}X\_{k}$ **(#5)**. At last, suppose that $C\_{1}(n) \to 0$ and $\varphi\_{S\_{n}/s\_{n}}(t) \to \exp(-t^2/2)$ as $n\to\infty$, then we would show that $C_2(n) \to 0$ as $n\to\infty$ in a similar manner.


## III
---
The [Lindeberg–Lévy's CLT]() have become the sovereign in terms of its popularities. Suppose $(X\_n)\_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables with $\operatorname{E}X_n = \mu$ and $\operatorname{Var}X_n = \sigma^2 < \infty$. The CLT states that $\bar{X}_n \xrightarrow{d} \mathcal{N}(\mu, \sigma^2/n)$ as $n\to\infty$ and so $\sqrt{n}(\bar{X}_n - \mu) \xrightarrow{d} \mathcal{N}(0, \sigma^2)$. Hence we have $Z_n = \sigma^{-1}[\sqrt{n}(\bar{X}_n - \mu)] \xrightarrow{d} Z$ as $n\to\infty$. This is a basis of [statistical hypothesis tests]() whereby researchers examine an assumption regarding a population parameter such as $\operatorname{E}X$. Moreover, we can simply assume that the dist. of the sum of residuals, denoted by $\Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}\varepsilon^2_k$, is approximately normal when scaled by $1/n$, although each error term $\varepsilon^2_k = (X_k - \hat{X}_k)^2 \not \sim \mathcal{N}(0,\sigma^{2}_k)$. In general, we draw a [QQ plot]() or run the [Shapiro-Wilk test]().

As before, let $Z_n = (S_n - n\mu)/\sqrt{n\sigma^2} = \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}(X\_k - \mu)/\sqrt{n\sigma^2} = \Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}Y\_{k}/\sqrt{n}$, where $Y\_{k} = (X\_{k} - \mu)/\sigma$ with $\operatorname{E}Y\_{k}=0$ and $\operatorname{Var}Y\_{k} = 1$. Thus the characteristic function is given by $\varphi\_{Z\_n}(t) = \varphi\_{\Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}Y\_{n}/\sqrt{n}}(t) = \prod\_{k=1}^{n}\varphi\_{Y\_k}(t/\sqrt{n}) = [\,\varphi\_{Y\_1}(t/\sqrt{n})\,]^n$. For all $t\in\mathbb{R}$, we can write $\varphi\_{Z\_n}(t) =[\, 1 - t^{2}/2n + \mathcal{o}(t^2/n) \,]^n \to \exp(-t^2/2)$ as $n \to \infty$ for the continuity theorem to complete proof. Note that the convergence is uniform in $z \in \mathbb{R}$ such that $\lim\_{n\to\infty}\sup\_{z\in\mathbb{R}}{\vert P(\sqrt{n}(\bar{X}\_n-\mu)) - \Phi(z/\sigma) \vert} = 0$, and $\lim\_{n\to\infty}Z\_n = 0$ whenever $X$ is degenerate (i.e. $\sigma=0$). Lévy has been credited with using a characteristic function and the continuity theorem to make the proof simpler (i.e. similar to that of the WLLN).

The Lindeberg–Lévy's CLT is the special case of the above two. That is, under the i.i.d. assumption, whenever $\sigma^2 < \infty$, the Feller's condition yields $\sigma^2 / n\sigma^2 = 1/n \to 0$ as $n\to\infty$. Whereas, if each realisation $\mathbf{X}\_{n} = [X\_{1}, \dots, X\_{m}]^\top$ is an element of $\mathbb{R}^m$, then a sample mean is given by $\mathbf{\bar{X}}\_{n} = n^{-1}\Sigma\_{k=1}^{n}\mathbf{X}\_{k}$, where summation is calculated component-wisely. Provided that $\mathbf{\mu} = \operatorname{E}\mathbf{X} = [\operatorname{E}X\_{1}, \dots, \operatorname{E}X\_{m}]^{\top}$ and $\operatorname{K}\_{\mathbf{X}\mathbf{X}} = \operatorname{Var}\mathbf{X} = \operatorname{Cov}(\mathbf{X},\mathbf{X}) = \operatorname{E}[(\mathbf{X} - \mathbf{\mu})(\mathbf{X} - \mathbf{\mu})^{\top}] < \mathbf{\infty}$, the multivariate CLT would yield $\sqrt{n}(\mathbf{\bar{X}}\_{n}-\mathbf{\mu}) \xrightarrow{d} \mathcal{N}(0, \operatorname{K}\_{\mathbf{X}\mathbf{X}})$ as $n\to\infty$ **(#6)**. Along with the uniform convergence, the [Berry–Esseen theorem]() shows that the rate of convergence is at least on the order of $1/{\sqrt{n}}$, when the 3rd central moment exists and is finite **(#7)**.


## **
--- 
**(#1)** For $n$ coin tosses, if $X_k=\text{Head}$ for some $k=1,\dots,n$, then we record $h \text{ += } 1$. **(#2)** Other proof uses the Stirling's formula. **(#3)** Recall that the skewness $\mu_3 / \sigma^3$ and the kurtosis $\mu_4 / \sigma^4$ are measures of the dist. function (i.e. $\mu_r$ is the $r$-th central moment). **(#4)** Whole proof is well explained in [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W4oMaExapVs). **(#5)** E.g. Let $(X\_n)\_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ be a set of uniformly bounded $X_k$ such that ${\vert X_k \vert} \leq M$ for all $k \leq n$. If $s_\infty = \infty$, then $\operatorname{E}[(X_k - \mu_k)^{2} I\_{\vert X_k - \mu_k \vert > \varepsilon{s_n}}] = \int\_{\lbrace \vert X_k - \mu_k \vert > \varepsilon{s_n} \rbrace} (X_k - \mu_k)^{2}\,\mathrm{d}F_k(x) \leq (2M)^2P(\vert X_k - \mu_k \vert > \varepsilon{s_n}) \leq (2M)^2\sigma^2_k / \varepsilon^2{s^2_n}$, and so Lindeberg's condition is met. **(#6)** Also, the LLNs guarantee that $P(\mathbf{\bar{X}}_n - \mu = 0) \to 1$ as $n\to\infty$. **(#7)** Shevtsova (2011) and  [Tyurin (2010)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/0912.0726.pdf) reduced the error from 7.59 that of Esseen (1942) to 0.56. Besides, the [Stein's method](https://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/math/ucb/text/math_s6_v2_article-34.pdf) is a general method to obtain bounds on the distance between two probability distributions.