---
layout: default
title: "11. martingale"
tags: tag1
use_math: true
---


# Martingale
---
Originated from gambling, a player will make, on average, no profit with only a limited budget. Paul Lévy (who proved that the normalised sum have some asymptotic nomral limit in 1930s) has imposed a concept of martingales to prove that the famous martingale startegy is fool idea. In sprit of Levy's work, a massive breakthrough has been achieved by Joseph Doop. It is a fascinating framework that supports study of stochastic processes, and moreover, a modern probability theory.

## I
---
Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ be a probability space, $X = (X\_t)\_{t \in T}$ be a stochastic process, and $F = (\mathcal{F}\_t)\_{t \in T}$ be a [filtration]() representing monotonically increasing sub-$\sigma$-algebras $\mathcal{F}\_{0} \subseteq \mathcal{F}\_1 \subseteq \dots \subseteq \mathcal{F}\_{s} \subseteq \mathcal{F}\_{t} \subseteq \dots \subseteq \mathcal{F}$. In general, the [natural filtration]() $\mathcal{F}\_{t} = \sigma(X\_{s} \,\vert\, s \leq t)$ generated by each $X\_s$ is used as the smallest filtration containing all information up to time $t$, and we say $X$ is [adapted to the filtration]() $F$ if $X\_{t}:\Omega \to \mathbb{R}$ is $\mathcal{F}\_{t}$-measurable for all $t \in T$. In particular, an adapted stochastic process $X$ defined on a filtered probability space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, F, P)$ is called a [martingale]() if, for all $s, t \in T$ and $0 \leq s \leq t$, it satisfies (i) $X\_{t} \in L^1$ and (ii) $\operatorname{E}(X_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}) = X\_{s}$ almost surely **(#1)**.

We recall that $\operatorname{E}(X\_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}) = \operatorname{E}[\operatorname{E}(X\_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{t}) \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}] = \operatorname{E}[\operatorname{E}(X \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}) \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{t}]$ due to the properties of $\operatorname{E}$. This implies the second martingale property $\operatorname{E}(X\_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}) = \operatorname{E}(\operatorname{E}(X\_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{t-h}) \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_s) = \operatorname{E}(X\_{t-h} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_s) = \dots = \operatorname{E}(X\_{s+h} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_s) = X\_s$ with some $h \geq 0$. In particular, all martingales have a constant mean in which $\operatorname{E}X\_{t} = \operatorname{E}X\_{0}$ for all $t \in T$. Furthermore, due to the way a martingale is constructed, it is the class of a flat line that can be used to model a fair game. A partial sum process $S = (S\_t)\_{t \in T}$ consists of $S\_{t} = \Sigma\_{s=0}^{t}X_s$ with ind. $X\_s$ whose $\operatorname{E}X\_s = 0$ is a popular example of a discrete-time martingale (i.e. the Poisson process and the Wiener process).

A few adjustment of the definition provides another accessible martingales. In particular, an adapted process $D = (D\_{t})\_{t \in T}$ is called a [martingale difference sequence]() if, for all $s, t \in T$ such that $0 \leq s \leq t$, one has both (i) $D\_{t} \in L^1$ and (ii) $\operatorname{E}(D\_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}) = 0$ a.s.. Given a martingale $X$, if we set the martingale differences (i.e increments) by $D\_{0} = X\_{0}$ and $D\_{t} = X\_{t} - X\_{t-1}$ for all $t \in \mathbb{Z}^{+}$ **(#2)**, where $X\_{t}$ is the sum of $D\_{s}$ for all $s \leq t$, then then $X$ and $D$ are adpated to the same $F$. Furthermore, as it is almost trivial that $\operatorname{E}D\_{t} = 0$ for all $t \in \mathbb{Z}^{\geq}$, we can prove that $\operatorname{E}(D\_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}) = 0$ a.s. for all $t, s \in \mathbb{Z}^{\geq}$ such that $s < t$, and we can have some intuition that a sequence with ind. increments would be a martingale with zero mean.


## II
---
If, for all $0 \leq s \leq t$, the identity is replaced by $\operatorname{E}(X_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_{s}) \geq X\_{s}$ a.s., then $X$ is called a [submartingale](). Similarly, if $\operatorname{E}(X_{t} \,\vert\, \mathcal{F}\_s) \leq X\_s$ a.s., then $X$ is called a [supermartingale](). From the definition, a submartingale (supermartingale) has a monotonically increasing (monotonically decreasing) expectation, and a martingale is both a sub- and a super- martingale **(#3)**. // In continuous time, however, the continuity of the sample paths $t \to X\_t$ and the filtration $t \to \mathcal{F}\_t$ are necessary. Especially, we assume that $X$ is right continuous (i.e. has left limits), and $F$ is right continuous (i.e. $\mathcal{F}\_t$-progressively measurable) and complete. I.e. we say $F$ is complete if (i) $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ is complete and (ii) $\{A \in \mathcal{F}: P(A)=0\} \subset \mathcal{F}\_0$.

We say a martingale $X$ is square-integrable if $\operatorname{E}X^{2}\_{t} < \infty$ for all $t \in T$, and the square of an $L^2$-martingale $X$ has zero mean, uncorrelated differences (i.e. independence => uncorrelation <=> may or may not be orthogonal), and furthermore, admits a decomposition of conditional second moments (p179) **(#4)**. //

More generally, for any stochastic process, we look at the Doob decomposition theorem: any submartingale $X = (X\_t)\_{t \in T}$ can be uniquely decomposed into the sum of a martingale $M = (X\_t)\_{t \in T}$ and an predictable process $A = (A\_t)\_{t \in T}$ starting with $A\_0 = 0$. That is, $X\_t = M\_t + A\_t$ for all $t \in T$. // We can further explore the theorem with a submartingale. // The proof came up in 1953 and showed both the existence and the uniqueness. // the Krickeberg decom. (p.490) // the Riesz decom. (p.491) // If the variables are uncorrelated, when summing the individual variances, we can use the linearity of expecation to ease computations. // I.e. Gaussian stochastic processes.


## III
---
Suppose $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, F, P)$ is a filtered probability space, then a random variable $\tau: \Omega \to T$ with respect to the filtration $F$ is called a [stopping time]() if one has $\{\omega: \tau(\omega) \leq t\} \in \mathcal{F}\_t$ for all $t \in T$, and a [stopped $\sigma$-algebra]() $\mathcal{F}\_{\tau} = \lbrace A \in \mathcal{F}\_{\infty}: A \cap \lbrace \tau \leq t \rbrace \in \mathcal{F}\_t, \forall t \in T \rbrace$, $\mathcal{F}\_{\infty} = \sigma(\bigcup\_{t} \mathcal{F}\_t)$, quantifies amount of information stacked up to $\tau$. For example, the first hitting time $\tau\_B = \inf \lbrace t: X\_t \in B, \, B \in \mathcal{B}\_\mathbb{R} \rbrace$ is a stopping time. If we let an event $\lbrace \tau\_B = t \rbrace = \lbrace X\_0 \notin B, \dots, X\_s \notin B, X\_t \in B \rbrace = \bigcap\_{r=0}^{s} {\lbrace X\_r \in B \rbrace}^c \cap \lbrace X\_t \in B \rbrace$, then it is quite clear that $\{\tau\_B = t\} \in \mathcal{F}\_t$, but $\tau\_{B}^{\prime} = \sup \lbrace t: X\_t \in B, \, B \in \mathcal{B}\_\mathbb{R} \rbrace$ is not a stopping time because the full trajectory of $X$ (i.e. on the entire $T$) has to be known **(#5)**.

stopping time theorem::: Properties of stopping times (w/ sufficient condition for the integrability of a stopping time). // expectation of stopped martingale is not in general equal to that of a given martingale (i.e. the problem is that $\tau$ is too large), in fact, we have $\operatorname{E}\tau = \infty$ // The optional stopping theorem (or Doob's optional sampling theorem) which applies to doubling strategies states that, // Doob's (maximal) inequality generalises Kolmogorov's inequality.

martingale convergence theorem::: Doob's martingale convergence theorems (If you're more analysis oriented, martingales, provide (IMO) the most natural proof of the Radon-Nikodym theorem (ok, for separable sigma algebras). The proof is an application of the Martingale Convergence Theorem) // martingale clt


## **
---
**(#1)** The slower a filtration $t \to \mathcal{F}_t$ grows, the easier it is for an adapted stochastic process to be a martingale. **(#2)** I.e. A random walk, or, more generally, the partial sum process is a martingale. **(#3)** All results about sub-martingales have dual statements for sup-martingales and vice versa. **(#4)** To be precise, such $X$ is merely a submartingale in general, and one has to compensate the process to exhibit a martingale (p183). The compensation is //. **(#5)** If $B$ is a closed set then $X$ has continuous sample paths. and an elementary application of first hitting times can be studied in the reflection principle for a Wiener process.


// kolmogorov-doob inequality // doob's maximal inequality // 

// In discrete time, a process $X = (X\_t)\_{t \in T}$ being adapted to $F = (\mathcal{F}\_t)\_{t \in T}$ is predictable if $\sigma(X\_t) \subset \mathcal{F}\_{t-1}$ for all $t \in T$.