---
layout: default
title: "12. markov chain"
tags: tag1
use_math: true
---


# Markov Chain
---
Martingale property says that the expectated value of the future event equals to the current value given the entire past events. In contrast, the Markov property says that the future is ind. to the past. Weather forecast is an iconic example which depends primarily on the current weather instead of the entire record of history. // The stablisation of relative frequencies를 mc로 formulate한 뒤 iterate해서 이룰 수 있다. 


## I
---
A stochastic process $X = (X\_t)\_{t \in T}$ consists of $\mathbb{S}$-valued random variables $X\_{t}:\Omega \to S$ is called a [Markov process]() if it satisfies the [Markov property](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_property) $P(X\_{t} = x\_{t} \,\vert\, X\_{t-1} = x\_{t-1}, \dots, X\_{1} = x\_1) = P(X\_{t} = x\_{t} \,\vert\, X\_{t-1} = x\_{t-1})$ for all $t \in T$. We chiefly use a discrete-time Markov process on a countable state space $\mathbb{S}$, called a [Markov chain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_chain), allowing the joint pmf for $t$ consecutive realisations to be calculated by $P(X\_{t}, X\_{t-1}, \dots, X\_{1}) = P(X\_{t}\,\vert\,X\_{t-1}) P(X\_{t-1}\,\vert\,X\_{t-2}) \dots P(X\_{1}) = \prod\_{k=2}^{t}P(X\_{k}\,\vert\,X\_{k-1}) P(X\_{1})$. Thus our focus lies on the initial [state probabilities]() $\pi\_{j}(1) = P(X\_{1} = j)$ and the $1$-step [transition probabilities]() $p\_{ij}(t) = P(X\_{t} = j \,\vert\, X\_{t-1} = i)$, where $i, j \in \mathbb{S}$ **(#1)**.

If $\mathbb{S}$ contains $n$ distinct elements (i.e. finite), then we draw a [transition matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stochastic_matrix) $\mathbf{P} = (p\_{ij})$ with $\Sigma\_{j \in \mathbb{S}}p\_{ij} = 1$, where $\mathbf{P}$ is an $n \times n$ positive semidefinite matrix. If, in addition, it is [time-homogeneous]() $P(X\_{t} = j \,\vert\, X\_{t-1} = i) = P(X\_{t-1} = j \,\vert\, X\_{t-2} = i)$ for all $t \in T$, the [Chapman-Kolmogorov equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chapman%E2%80%93Kolmogorov_equation) yields $\mathbf{P}(k)\mathbf{P}(s) = \mathbf{P}(k+s) = [p\_{ij}(k+s)]$ for all $k, s \in T$. Therefore, the $k$-th power of transition matrices is equal to the $t$-step transition matrix $\mathbf{P}^t = \mathbf{P}(t) = [p\_{ij}(t)]$ **(#2)**. For instance, let $k=2$ and $h \in \mathbb{S}$ be an intermediate state in betwen $i$ and $j$, then we get $p\_{ij}(2) = P(X\_{k} = j \,\vert\, X\_{k-2} = i) = \Sigma\_{h}P(X\_{k}=j \,\vert\, X\_{k-1}=h) P(X\_{k-1}=h \,\vert\, X\_{k-2}=i) = \Sigma\_{h}p\_{ih}(1)p\_{hj}(1)$.

We now consider a state pmf $\pi(k) = [\pi\_{j}(k)]$, where $\pi\_{j}(k) = \Sigma\_{i}p\_{ij}\pi\_{i}(k-1)$. If $\pi\_{j}(k)\to\pi\_{j}$ and $\pi\_{i}(k-1)\to\pi\_{i}$ as $k\to\infty$, then $\lim\_{k\to\infty}\pi(k) = \pi$ is a stationary state pmf or a [steady state](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sXiCxZDrTU), where $\pi$ is a $1 \times n$ row vector with $\Sigma\_{j}\pi\_{j} = 1$ and $\pi\_{j} = \Sigma\_{i}p\_{ij}\pi\_{i}$. In fact, the [Perron-Frobenius theorem]() enumerates the eigenvalues of $\mathbf{P}$ by $1= \vert \lambda\_{1} \vert > \vert \lambda\_{2} \vert \geq\cdots\geq \vert \lambda\_{n} \vert$, and also its matrix notation $\pi\mathbf{P}=\pi$ is in the form $v^{\top}A = v^{\top}\lambda$. Thus, the left eigenvector $q\_{1}$ which holds $q\_{1}^{\top}\mathbf{P} = q^{\top}\_{1}\lambda\_{1}$ is a steady state, and the rate of convergence of $\pi(k)$ is in the order of $\lambda_2/\lambda_1$. Desirably, the limiting distribution $\pi=\pi(1)\mathbf{P}^{\infty}$ of a time-homogeneous Markov chain, if exists, is always unique.


## II
---
The followings are jargons that are taken in the formal statements describing behaviours of a Markov chain and the conditions under which a state pmf becomes steady. A state $j$ is [accessible]() from a state $i$, denoted by $i \rightarrow j$, if $p\_{ij}(k) > 0$ for some $k\geq{1}$. Whereas, $i$ is [absorbing]() if $p\_{ij}(k) = 0$ for some $k\geq{1}$ and all $j \in S$. If both $i \rightarrow j$ and $j \rightarrow i$, and thus $i \leftrightarrow j$, we say $i$ and $j$ [communicate]() with each other **(#3)** and belong to the same [class](). A collection of all states of a Markov chain will be consisting of one or more disjoint communication classes. A Markov chain with a single class is [irreducible]() in which every states in the chain communicate with each other (i.e. a state space is the class).

Suppose $f\_{ii} = P(X\_{k} = i \;\text{for some}\; k>1 \,\vert\, X\_{1}=i)$ is a probability that a system departed from $i$ returns to $i$ for all $i \in \mathbb{S}$. We say $i$ is [recurrent]() if $f\_{ii} = 1$, and [transient]() if $f\_{ii} < 1$. That is, a recurrent state occurs infinitly often and a transient state occurs finitly often. In fact, we can assume that a probability of escaping a transient state $i$ follows $\operatorname{Bernoulli}(1-f\_{ii})$, and thus a number of returns to $i$ during a $k$-steps follows $\text{Geom}(1-f\_{ii})$. On the other hand, if we let $\Sigma\_{k=2}^{\infty}p\_{ii}(k) = \Sigma\_{k=2}^{\infty}\operatorname{E}[I\_i(X\_{k})\,\vert\,X\_{{1}}=i] = \operatorname{E}[\Sigma\_{k=2}^{\infty}I\_{i}(X\_{k})\,\vert\,X\_{1}=i]$ be a mean number of returns to a state $i$ **(#4)**, then $i$ is recurrent if and only if $\Sigma\_{k=2}^{\infty}p\_{ii}(k) = \infty$, and transient if and only if $\Sigma\_{k=2}^{\infty}p\_{ii}(k) < \infty$.

Provided that, we say $i$ has [period]() $d$ if $p\_{ii}(k) = 0$ whenever $k$ % $d \neq 0$ for all $k > d$ **(#5)**. A state $i$ is [periodic]() if $d>1$, and [aperiodic]() if $d=1$. Note that, period, like recurrence and transience, is a class property. Hence, every state in a class has the same period, and a Markov chain is aperiodic if it is irreducible with period $d=1$. Subsequently, we let $\mu\_{ii} = \operatorname{E}t\_{ii}$ be a [mean recurrence time](), where $t\_{ii}$ is an elapsed time to returning $i$ from $i$, and say $i$ is [positive recurrent]() if $\mu\_{ii} < \infty$, and [null recurrent]() if $\mu\_{ii} = \infty$. If, in addition, $i$ is the initial departure and $\lbrace t\_{ii}(l) \rbrace\_{1 < l \leq k}$ is a sequence of i.i.d. elapsed times, then a proportion of time spent in $i$ until $l$-th returns will by $l/\Sigma\_{m=1}^{l}t\_{ii}(m)$ **(#6)**.


## III
---
A state $i$ is [ergodic](https://stats.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Probability_Theory/Book%3A_Introductory_Probability_(Grinstead_and_Snell)/11%3A_Markov_Chains/11.03%3A_Ergodic_Markov_Chains) if it is aperiodic and positive recurrent, hence an irreducible Markov chain is ergodic if the states are ergodic. In particular, an ergodic system follows if there exists $N$ such that any state $i$ is reachable from any other state $j$ during any step $n \leq N$. For example, a fully connected transition matrix (i.e. $p\_{ij} > 0$ for all $i,j\in\mathbb{S}$) fulfils the sufficient condition with $N = 1$. However, a system with more than one state and just one out-going transition per state is either not irreducible or not aperiodic, hence cannot be ergodic. Ergodicity shines due to the fact that it guarantees the uniquness of a steady state whilst the limit varies with an initial state (as mentioned). We see the following;

A Markov chain is [reversible](https://cims.nyu.edu/~holmes/teaching/asa19/handout_Lecture3_2019.pdf) with respect to $\pi$ if it holds the [detailed balanced condition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Detailed_balance) $\pi\_{i}p\_{ij} = \pi_{j}p\_{ji}$ for all $i,j\in\mathbb{S}$. In particular, if $X$ is a general system and there exists $\pi$ such that the condition is held, then $\Sigma_{i}\pi\_{i}p\_{ij} = \Sigma_{i}\pi\_{j}p\_{ji} = \pi\_{j}\Sigma_{i}p\_{ji} = \pi\_{j}$ and so $X$ holds the global balance condition $\pi = \pi{P}$. Consequently, these underlie the framework called [Markov chain Monte Carlo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markov_chain_Monte_Carlo) (MCMC) **(#7)**, and supplement the [rejection sampling](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OXDqjdVVePY) that learns nothing from the last sample. The [Metropolis algorithm](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yCv2N7wGDCw) is a popular instance which uses symmetric conditional candidate density functions to return (i.e. after a [burn-in period](http://users.stat.umn.edu/~geyer/mcmc/burn.html)) sequences of numbers which we hope can reflect a target density function.

Whilst MCMC can also run Bayesian inference, it may suffer the curse of dimensionality, whereby regions of higher probability tend to stretch and get lost in an increasing volume of space. Intuitively, a well-designed model that can learn all information from the whole records would outperform a model with the Markov property. However, computing the joint distribution of such model is impractical, and hence we naively assume the Markov property. The [PageRank](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PageRank) algorithm used for Google's search engine is an industrial application of a markov chain. // Further topic // a Markov chain is related to a martingale by a harmonic function [ref1.](https://www.randomservices.org/random/martingales/Properties.html) // MCMC without likelihoods [ref2.](https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.0306899100)


## **
---
**(#1)** Many results for Markov chains can be extended to chains with an uncountable state space, so-called Harris chains. **(#2)** We may eigen-decompose a trainsion matrix: $\mathbf{P}^k = \mathbf{Q}\mathbf{\Lambda}^k\mathbf{Q}^{-1}$, so that a diagonal opeartion makes a matrix multiplication more efficient. **(#3)** If $i \rightarrow h$ and $h \rightarrow j$, then $i \rightarrow j$. **(#4)** I.e. $I\_{i}\lbrace X\_{k} \rbrace$ is the indicator function. **(#5)** Equivalently, $d= \gcd \lbrace k>1:p_{ii}(k)>0 \rbrace$. **(#6)** The WLLN yields $l/\Sigma\_{m=1}^{l}t\_{ii}(m) \to 1/\mu\_{ii} = \pi\_i$ as $k\to\infty$. **(#7)** Example of a monte carlo simulation; estimating pi.