---
layout: default
title: "401. computer"
tags: cs400
use_math: true
---


# Computer

The cs400 covers the rudimentary elements of Computer Science and aims to enhance the work-related self-efficacy of someone only with a degree in Mathematics. We begin with hardwares, ..., Other major components include Power Supply, Cooling System, or I/O Devices are excluded.

- Limited to practical ...
- [video link 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d86ws7mQYIg)
- [video link 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h9Z4oGN89MU&t=762s)


## I
---
[The Analytical Engine]() (1837): Designed by english Mathematician Charles Babbage, is regarded as the first concept of a general-purpose digital computer that featured with an arithmetic logic unit, control flow leveraging conditional branching and loops, and memory modules; [Turing machine]() (1936): Proposed by Alan Turing, this model provided a framework for analysing the capabilities and limitations of computational models, thereby establishing the field of Computer Science; [ENIAC]() (1945): The Numerical Integrator and Computer, designed by John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert, is the first programmable, electronic, general-purpose digital computer that is also [Turing-complete](). 

Computers vary in size, processing power, and its purpose but generally fall into one of the followings: i) [Personal Computers]() (PCs): are versatile and typically used by individuals for office works, internet browsing, gaming, multimedia, emulation, programming, and more; ii) [Mainframes](): purpose-built for high-volume transaction processing, bulk data handling, and mission-critical system that demand exceptional reliability and security; iii) [Supercomputers](): have unmatched speed and processing power, making them ideal for intensive tasks such as climate modeling, simulations, and intricate computations in fields like physics and cryptography.

The [motherboard]() in a computer provides the physical circuitries and connections for the key components of the [Von Neumann architecture]() proposed in 1940s. This is the central hub where the CPU socket, RAM slots, storage interfaces, I/O ports, and other peripherals seamlessly communicate via the [buses]() and [chipsets](). The module in modern computers have expanded slots for GPUs, sound cards, or extra storages, intended to offer capabilities or flexibilities for future upgrades. The BIOS/UEFI [firmware]() embedded into the module first performs [self-tests]() (POST) as the power supplies, then the bootloader (e.g. Linux's GRUB, Windows's Boot Manager) loads the kernel from the HDD into RAM.


## II
---
**1. Central Processing Unit**

The [central processing unit]() (CPU or processor) executes a set of instructions, called a [program](), written in some programming languages. While the module performance varies based on its clock speed in GHz and a number of cores, a core performs tasks using the [arithmetic logic unit]() (ALU) and [control unit]() (CU) made up of interconnected wires and registers, and modern CPUs with multiple [cores]() (e.g. $4$ to $64$) enable concurrency and parallelism within programs. In addition, the [CPU cache]() *(i.e. L1 and L2 inside each core, and L3 is shared)* is smaller but faster memory located closer to a core, designed to further reduce the time required to access data from the main memory (RAM).

**2. Random Access Memory**

The [random access memory]() (RAM) holds only actively used data and programs (aka. [processes]()), but all information lost their residencies without continuous power supply. The module enables the CPU's lightning-fast task execution through near-instantaneous data access at the cost of volatility. The [dynamic RAM]() (DRAM) is the most common type that requires constant refreshing to retain data. The [static RAM]() (SRAM) is more expensive, but faster and less frequently refreshed, appropriate for cache memory. When a process lacks memory space, a portion of the hard disk can serve as [virtual memory](), to extend the functionality of RAM.

**3. Persistent Storage**

The [hard disk drive]() (HDD) is a type of non-volatile storage that retains data even when powered off. HDDs store information on magnetic platters, with a mechanical arm reading and writing data (e.g. Apple's Mac does not allow you to change the hardware). Although slower than a [solid state drive]() (SSD), HDDs offer higher storage capacities at a lower cost. They are ideal for archiving large amounts of data where speed is not the primary concern.... 하드디스크는 열심히 데이터를 찾는 구조이지만, SSD (메모리)는 엑세스가 바로 되기에 속도는 비교불가 (NVMe SSD?). CPU내에 메모리가 들어가고, 중간에 있던 메모리의 방식이 활용되어 디스크 형태를 바꿈. hd의 실린더 회전 속도 향상에 집중하다가 패러다임이 일어남.


## III
---
**<a name="gpu"></a>4. Graphics Processing Unit**

The [graphics processing unit]() (GPU), an integral of a graphics card, is designed for [single instruction, multiple threads]() (SIMT) execution of relatively simple and repetitive tasks. Unlike CPUs, GPUs have a way more cores while each operates at a lower clock speed, but still ensure efficient computation and high-throughput, when paired with high-bandwidth memory. Unfortunately, the similar terms [floating point operations per second]() (FLOPS) and [floating ooint operations]() (FLOPs) are used respectively to quantify a GPU’s performance and a deep learning model's computational demands, with the latter often varying based on hardware and model design (e.g. #. of params).

Different types of cores within GPU are responsible for ..... However, the equal-sized set of hardwares may differ in performances. For example, GTX 980 Ti(Maxwell architecture)와 GTX 980 Ti(Pascal architecture)의 경우는 비슷한 수의 CUDA Core와 Transistor가 존재하지만 트랜지스터의 크기가 성능차를 만듬. 더 작은 Transistor를 사용하는 Pascal architecture의 전력소비 감소로 더 많은 트랜지스터가 사용가능했고, max clock frequency가 향상되어 단일 Core가 더 빠르게 작업을 수행하는 식으로 두 설계구조 간의 성능차를 만듬. The below is an overview of the NVIDIA's Ampere architectures (A100 40GB) of the GA100 in the JSON format with modules commonly found in their recent products:

    A100: { 
            graphics_processingc_cluster: [  # i.e. repeat for 7 GPCs
                    {
                            name: GPC1,
                            texture_processing_cluster: [  # i.e. repeat for 6 TPCs/GPC 
                                    {
                                            name: TPC1,
                                            "streaming_multiprocessor": [  # i.e. repeat for 2 SMs/TPC 
                                                    {
                                                            name: SM1
                                                            "cuda_cores": 64,
                                                            "tensor_cores": 4,
                                                            "warp_schedulers": 4,
                                                            "sm_local_memory": {"registers": "256 KB/SM", "L1_cache/SMEM": "192 KB"}
                                                    },
                                            ]
                                    },  
                            ]
                    },
            ],
        
            memory_hierarchy: {
                    "L2_cache": "40 MB"
                    "VRAM": {"interface": "5120-bit HBM2", "num_stacked": 5, "total_capacity": "40 GB", "bandwidth": "1.55 TB/s"},
            },
        
            interconnect: {"NVLink": "600 GB/s", "PCIe": "31.5 GB/s"}
            multi_instance_gpu: {support: True, max_num_instances: 7}
            
            # ... and contain other hardware components such as "DisplayEngine" for rendering tasks.
            # In summary, A100 of the GA100 contains 7 GPCs, 7-8 TPCs/GPC, 2 SMs/TPC, up to 16 SMs/GPC, 108 SMs.
    }


The [streaming multiprocessor]() (SM) within a GPU is a core processing unit responsible for executing thread blocks. Given that a [thread]() is the smallest unit of execution which might handle part of a tensor operation (e.g. an element-wise multiplication), threads are grouped into [wraps]() of equal size to execute instructions simultaneously under the SIMT model, and a [thread block]() is a collection of warps assigned to an SM. To prevent underutilisation of SMs (e.g. *"a single thread block on a single SM"* scenario), we should dispatch more thread blocks than the number of existing SMs, and the [warp scheduler]() leads SMs to switch between, the less the impact of latency, maximising its throughput.

A [cuda core]() within an SM is a a general-purpose processing units, essentially an ALU, performing basic arithmetic and logic operations such as $+$, $\times$, $\land$, $\lor$, and $\neg$. Compared to CPUs, GPUs comprise much simpler compute units and thousands of cores, which are highly focused on (one could say monotonous) parallel data processing rater than convoluted tasks performed sequentially. While each thread, with support for `fp` and `int`, generally handles one operation (e.g. $+$ or $\times$) per cycle, cuda cores are not yet optimal for matrix multiplication. Consequently, other neighboring hardware exists to remedy their limitations and increase overall throughput.

NVIDIA introduced [tensor cores]() in its Volta and Turing architectures (2017). These cores accelerate matrix multiplication by running [**f**used **m**ultiply-**a**dd]() (FMA) operations per clock cycle in [mixed precision](). FMA enables efficient calculations of the form $ax + b$ by only taking a single step. Input matrices for tensor cores are represented in fp16 (i.e. 2 bytes per element) that is half the precision of its output, and larger NNs can require i) less memory for training and deployment, ii) less memory bandwidth, and iii) faster mathematical operations. This precision reducing should be selectively applied only in parts of the computation that do not require full precision to maintain model quality.

*The more memory hierarchy is optimised, the higher data throughput and lower latency*. SM in A100 has its own 192 KB of [shared memory]() (SMEM) and SMEM provides high bandwidth and low latency (i.e. close to the compute units), that are desirable for large matrix multiplications and convolutions. Whereas, [L1 cache]() reduces the need for accessing slower global memory as it holds frequently used data. NVIDIA significantly improved performance of their Volta (V100, the predecessor of the A100) by combining these two memories and allowing L1 cache operations to attain the benefits of SMEM. A CUDA programmer is still free from complex memory management via APIs.

Next, there is [L2 cache]() feeding massive computational throughput to L1/SMEM. It is shared across all SMs and provide fast access to larger datasets and helping manage the flow between SMs and the GPU’s [high-bandwidth memory]() (HBM2). The term HBM2 is often interchangably used with GPU memroy, GPU RAM, DRAM, and VRAM. It is the framebuffer size of the GPU and DRAM sitting in the GPU.

An [interconnect]() is a communication link that enables data transfer between components within a computer system. In the context of GPUs and CPUs, interconnects allow different parts of a system—like processors, memory, storage devices, and expansion cards—to communicate efficiently. They can be physical connections like cables or circuit pathways on a motherboard, or even software protocols that manage how data flows between components. For example, technologies like NVIDIA’s NVLink is an [inter-GPU and GPU-CPU Interconnects](), managing data transfer across various types of multiple processing units, and allowing GPUs to efficiently share data for large-scale parallel processing tasks. Whereas, [system interconnects]()link the broader components of a system, such as processors, memory, storage, and expansion cards. Common interfaces like [Peripheral Component Interconnect Express]() (PCIe) supports high-throughput connections essential for tasks that depend on rapid access to storage or network resources, maintaining data flow throughout the entire system.